---
layout: page
title: "PC-SIG Diskette Library (Disk #861)"
permalink: /software/pcx86/sw/misc/pcsig/0001-0999/DISK0861/
machines:
  - id: ibm5170
    type: pcx86
    config: /machines/pcx86/ibm/5170/cga/1024kb/rev3/machine.xml
    diskettes: /machines/pcx86/diskettes.json,/disks/pcsigdisks/pcx86/diskettes.json
    autoGen: true
    autoMount:
      B: "PC-SIG Library Disk #0861"
    autoType: $date\r$time\rB:\rDIR\r
---

{% include machine.html id="ibm5170" %}

{% comment %}info_begin{% endcomment %}

## Information about "STATMATE/PLUS 1 OF 3 (ALSO 862, 863)"

    A statistical analysis package for handling numerical data, operated by
    entering one-line commands and subcommands.  Command ``batch'' files can
    be created for automatic execution, along with explanatory screen
    remarks.
    
    STATMATE operates on information contained in a database, generated by
    the program.  A user ID is required before entering a database, and for
    every new user ID, an empty database is created.  This feature permits
    multiple users to work with STATMATE while keeping the data files
    separated.
    
    Extract data from an ASCII text file and load it into the database for
    operation.  Data is stored in columns and rows, and you can extract
    portions of the data according to your specifications.  As you
    manipulate the data, the results can be displayed on the screen,
    printed, or saved on a disk file.
    
    The main analytic features are elementary statistics, scatter plots,
    cross tabulations, histograms, data comparison using the T-Test,
    correlation, arithmetic operations, distribution functions, curvilinear
    regression, multiple regression, nonlinear regression, data recoding,
    and data transformation and manipulation.  An on-line help facility is
    included to give you a detailed description of all the STATMATE
    commands.
{% comment %}info_end{% endcomment %}

{% comment %}samples_begin{% endcomment %}

## FILES861.TXT

{% raw %}
```
Disk No:  861
Program Title: STATMATE/PLUS version 1.3 (Disk 1 of 3)
PC-SIG version: 1.4

STATMATE is a three-disk statistical analysis package for handling
numerical data, and is operated by entering one-line commands and
subcommands.  Command "batch" files can be created for automatic
execution, along with screen remarks to explain the data manipulation on
the terminal.

The data STATMATE operates on is contained in a database, which is
generated by the program.  A user ID is required before entering a
database, and for every new user ID, an empty database is created.  This
feature permits multiple users to work with STATMATE while keeping the
data files separated.

The size of each database can be changed with the installation program.
STATMATE lets you extract data from an ASCII text file and load it into
the database for operation.  Data is stored in columns and rows, and you
can extract portions of the data according to your specifications.  As
you manipulate the data, you can have the output on results displayed on
the screen, printed, or saved on a disk file.

The main analytic features available with the STATMATE package are
elementary statistics, scatter plots, cross tabulations, histograms,
data comparison using the T-Test, correlation, arithmetic operations,
distribution functions, curvilinear regression, multiple regression,
nonlinear regression, data recoding, and data transformation and
manipulation.  An on-line help facility is included to give you a
detailed description of all the STATMATE commands.

You will need disks #861, #862 and #863 to run this program.

Usage:  Statistics Analysis.

Special Requirements:  Two disk drives.

How to Start:  Type GO (press enter).

Suggested Registration:  $50.00

File Descriptions:

SMATE    EXE  Main program.
SMINSTLL EXE  Installation program.
SMQDATA  COM  Data preparation program.
SMHELP   TXT  Help file.
DEMO          Example command file.
README        How to get started.
SMSA$         Configuration file.
???????  DAT  Sample data file (6 files).
???????  OVR  Overlay file (17 files).

PC-SIG
1030D E Duane Avenue
Sunnyvale Ca. 94086
(408) 730-9291
(c) Copyright 1987,88,89 PC-SIG, Inc.

```
{% endraw %}

## GO.TXT

{% raw %}
```
╔═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║            <<<<  Disk #861 STATMATE/PLUS (Disk 1 of 3)  >>>>            ║
╠═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╣
║ For documentation refer to disk number 863.                             ║
║                                                                         ║
║ To start STATMATE/PLUS, Type: SMINSTLL (press enter)                    ║
╚═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
```
{% endraw %}

## SMHELP.TXT

{% raw %}
```
HELP
                    ---COMMANDS---
  BREAKDOWN  COMPUTE    CHART      CORRELATE   CROSSTAB   CURVE 
  CUSUM      EDIT       ELSE       END        ERASE       EXECUTE  
  EXIT       GIVE       HELP       HISTOGRAM  INPUT       KOLMOGOROV 
  LET        NONLINEAR  ONEWAY     ONPARAM    PLOT        POLYNOMIAL
  PRINT      QUERY      RCORRELATE RECODE     REGRESSION  REMARK
  SET        SHOW 	STATISTICS STEPWISE   TNPARAM     TTEST
  TWOWAY     WHEN       WRITE 
  Hints:
	1. Enter HELP QUERY, for example, to get help on QUERY.
	2. Ordinarily STATMATE is terminated with the EXIT command.
	   However, it may be also by terminated by a control-c character.
	3. A command line may be continued onto another line by 
	   ending a line with a comma.
	4. In the command descriptions, parenthesises denote the
 	   default option for a modifier.  For example,
		TYPE  :  (FITTED), RESIDUAL, FORECAST
	   indicates FITTED is the default for TYPE.
	5. The variable #0 is predefined in STATMATE and represents
	   the variable containing 1,2,3,4,...

COM
			COMPUTE
  Purpose: Computes residuals, fitted, and forecast values after
	   completion of REGRESSION, CURVE, or POLY
  Examples:
       COMPUTE XRESLT,TYPE=RESIDUAL
       COMPUTE SALESCAST,TYPE=FORECAST
  Modifiers:
      TYPE     :  (FITTED), RESIDUAL, FORECAST
  Hints:
      1. The REGRESSION, CURVE, or POLY commands must be used to
         first calculate the coefficients which are used by COMPUTE.
      2. COMPUTE remembers the set of independent variables (X) and
         the dependent variable (Y) used to compute the coefficients
	 in the regression analysis last used.
      3. Missing values in the COMPUTE variable and the dependent
         variable influence whether the resulting value is a missing
         value or a computed value.
      4. Does not apply to NONLINEAR command's models.

CORR
			CORRELATE
  Purpose:  Computes pair-wise correlations
  Examples:
      CORRELATE URBANPOP,RURALPOP,...
      CORRELATE DOSAGE,TIME,ORDER=YES
  Modifiers:
      SIGNIFICANCE :  (NO) , YES
      ORDER        :  (NO) , YES

CROSS
			CROSS TABULATION
  Purpose:  Produces a two-way crosstabulation
  Examples:
      CROSSTAB FACTORA ON FACTORB

CURVE
			CURVE
  Purpose: Computes curvilinear regression on two variables
  Examples:
      CURVE Y ON X,TABLE=FIT,ANOVA,PARAM,BEST=TRES
      CURVE Y ON X,EQUATION=LIN,ORI,QUA,LOG
  Modifiers:
      EQUATION   : (LIN), HY1, HY2, EXP, HY3, LOG, ORI, POW, QUA, SQU 
		   ALL
      TABLE	 : (FIT), (PARAM), ANOVA
		   ALL
      BEST	 : (RSQ), TRES, ORES
      
EDIT
			EDIT
  Purpose:  Allows data to be edited
  Examples:
      EDIT YEAR,RESPONSE
  Hints:
      1.  Only the variables following EDIT may be edited with
          the EDIT subcommands.

END
			END
  Purpose:  Ends a WHEN command condition -- use HELP WHEN
  Examples:
      END

ELSE
			ELSE
  Purpose:  Reverses a WHEN command condition -- use HELP ELSE
  Examples:
      ELSE

ERASE
			ERASE
  Purpose:  Erases variables from the database
  Examples:
      ERASE SALES 
      ERASE #12 THRU END
  Hints:
      1.  Either a single variable or a set of consecutive variables
          can be erased.  For example, ERASE A THRU C is permitted
	  but ERASE A,C is not.

EXE
			EXECUTE
  Purpose:  Allows "batch" execution of commands
  Examples:
      EXECUTE CMDFILE
  Hints:
      1.  The file named must be an ASCII file.

EXIT
			EXIT
  Purpose:  Exits from STATMATE to the operating system
  Examples:
      EXIT

GIVE
			GIVE
  Purpose:  Gives attributes (name, type, missing value) to a variable
  Examples:
      GIVE NAME #15,VAR3,VAR4  -- assign the names VAR3, VAR4 to #15 and #16
      GIVE MISSING AGE,-1.0    -- interpret -1 as a missing value for AGE 
      GIVE TYPE #10,A,N,N,A    -- make #10 numeric type, #11 alpha type, etc.
  Hints:  
      1.  To give either a "missing value" or type attribute to a variable
 	  the the variable must first be erased (see ERASE).

HIST
			HISTOGRAM
  Purpose:  Produces a histogram of a variable
  Examples:
      HISTOGRAM SALES,BARS=8,VPOS=15,RANGE=17 THRU 20
  Modifiers:
      RANGE      :  min THRU max
      VPOSITION  :  number-of-lines (10)
      TITLE      :  title    
      BARS       :  number of bars (10)
  Hints:
      1.  Histogram divisions are determined by RANGE and BARS
      2.  Use single quotes (') around title

INPUT
				INPUT
  Purpose:  Provides a way of entering data from a file
  Examples:
      INPUT MYFILE KEEP 2,OMIT 1,KEEP 1
      INPUT DATAFILE.DAT KEEP 3 AT #22
  Hints:  
      1.  When reading in alpha data, make sure that you have used the
          GIVE TYPE command for any variables which are to contain 
          alpha data.
      2.  Make sure the input file is an ASCII file with DATA as the
          very first word on the first line, and no spaces before DATA.
      3.  A carriage return must appear at the end of the last line
	  of your data file.
      4.  OMIT and KEEP define which, and how many, fields are either
	  omitted or kept from the input file.  Enough KEEP and OMIT
	  items must be specified to account for all fields in a record.

LET
			LET
  Purpose:  Performs arithmetic operations, functions, or generates a 
	    series of numbers and stores the result in a new variable
  Examples:
      LET NEWA=A+33.3
      LET VOLUME=AREA*HEIGHT
      LET XSQUARE=X**2
      LET CONTROL=X-44.0
  Hints:
      1.  Use HELP FUN for help on LET functions.
      2.  Complex arithmetic statements are not allowed. An expression
          is composed of at most one arithmetic operator (* + - / **). 
      3.  If a constant is involved it must appear after the operator. 
          For example, A+3.4 not 3.4+A.
      4.  The reciprocal of X can be obtained by using X**-1 since
	  1/X is not allowed.

FUN
			LET FUNCTIONS
      LET YEARLAG=LAG(YEAR,3)        -- lag 3 periods
      LET MYSAMPLE=SAM(STATES,12)    -- randomly sample 12 items
      LET SMOOTHED=MOV(SALES,4)      -- moving average with 4 terms
      LET TRANSFX=SQRT(X)	     -- square root
      LET GROWTH=LOG(POPULATON)      -- log base e
      LET SHRINK=LOG10(STEMSIZE)     -- log base 10
      LET WGTINC=EXP(WGT)	     -- exponential
      LET PERIOD=PRD(SALES,1,1,12)   -- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,1,2,...
      LET ROWNUM=STP(RESP,4,1,2)     -- 4,4,5,5,6,6,... (4=start,1=jump,2=prd)
      LET ODDNUMBERS=NUM(MONTH,1,2)  -- 1,3,5,7,... (1=start, 2=step)
      LET NORMOUT=NOR(DOSE,5.0,1.4)  -- Normal random nos. (mean=5, sd=1.4)
      LET UNIFNUM=UNI(COST,20,44.5)  -- Uniform random nos.(left=20,rght=44.5)
      LET RUNDOWN=DNOR(LOSS,-40.2,4) -- Normal distribution points
      LET DELAY=DEXP(DOSAGE,3.4)     -- Exponential distribution points
      LET WEAR=DWEI(MACHINE,2.2,4.1) -- Weibull distribution points
      LET FIXLOSS=DCAU(CONT,2.4,8)   -- Cauchy distribution points
      LET ABSOLUTE=ABS(X)	     -- Absolute value
      LET SUMIT=CUM(COST)	     -- Cumulative 
      LET WHOLE=INT(WGT)	     -- Integer or whole number
  Hints:
      1.  The first argument of any function is a variable name.

ONEWAY
			ONEWAY 
  Purpose:  Performs a one-way ANOVA
  Examples:
      ONEWAY DOSAGE ON TREATMENT,METHOD=LSD,ALPHA=.05
  Modifiers:
      METHOD  :  (NONE), LSD, DUNCAN
      ALPHA   :  (0.05)

POLY
			POLYNOMIAL
  Purpose:  Perform polynomial regression
  Examples:
      POLY SPEED ON #0,TABLE=ALL
  Modifiers:
      TABLE   :  (PARAM), (FIT), ANOVA
		 ALL
      DEGREE  :  (2)


PRINT
			PRINT
  Purpose:  List variables 
      PRINT VAR1,VARY,SALES 
      PRINT #2,DOSAGE
  Hints:
      1.  Prints any variable in the database
      2.  See SET command for hardcopy output
      3.  Use of the #0 variable is particularly useful here to 
 	  associate a case number with the data.

QUERY
			QUERY
  Purpose:  Display database information on variables
  Examples:
      QUERY #3,#4,INCOME
      QUERY #5 THRU #15
  Hints:
      1.  No more than 20 variables may be queried with QUERY

RECODE
			RECODE
  Purpose:  Changes the values of data to new values
  Examples:
      RECODE AGE,1 THRU 12 AS 1
      RECODE MONTH,'1' THRU '3' AS 'Q1'
  Hints:
      1.  Recodes numeric or alphanumeric data.  Useful with
          CROSSTABS.

REGRESS
			REGRESSION
  Purpose:  Performs multiple regression on several variables
  Examples:
      REGRESSION Y ON X1,X2,TABLE=FIT,PAR,ANOVA,INT=YES
  Modifiers:
      TABLE    :  (PARAM), (FIT), ANOVA
                  ALL
      INTERCEPT:  (YES), NO
      DURBIN   :  (NO), YES

REM
			REMARK
  Purpose:  Provides a way to document a STATMATE session
  Examples:
      REMARK YOUR WISH IS MY COMMAND

SET
			SET
  Purpose:  Sets a number of STATMATE parameters
  Examples:
      SET COPY=HARDCOPY
      SET COPY=FILE MYRESFIL.OUT
      SET COPY=OFF
      SET OUT=COSTRESID
      SET SEED=1532
  Hints:
      1.  The HARDCOPY option sends output to your printer but not
          to the terminal.
      2.  The FILE option sends output to the file but not to the
          terminal.
      3.  The OUT option is used with NONLINEAR.
      4.  A seed value cannot exceed 30000.
      5.  A change in the seed value will cause the LET random number
	  functions to generate different sequences of numbers.

STAT
			STATISTICS
  Purpose:  Performs simple statistical calculations
  Examples:
      STATISTICS #1,TABLE=SIMPLE
  Modifiers:
      TABLE  :  ALL or (SIMPLE)

TTES
			TTEST
  Purpose:  Performs a T-test
  Examples:
      TTEST WEIGHT ON SEX
  Hints:
      1.  The class variable (second variable) must contain only two classes.

TWOWAY
			TWOWAY
  Purpose:  Performs a two-way ANOVA
  Examples:
       TWOWAY WGTGAIN ON FACTA,FACTB,DESIGN=NOREPEAT
  Modifiers:
      DESIGN  :  (NOREPEAT), REPEAT, NESTED, UNBALANCED

WHEN
			WHEN
  Purpose:  Allows a subset of data for a variable to be selected 
	    for analysis
  Examples:
       WHEN #0=50 THRU 100
       WHEN AGE>10 AND SEX='MALE'
       WHEN AGE=10 THRU 40
       WHEN YEAR=1982,1984,1986
  Hints:
      1. Only simple expressions are allowed, i.e., one AND or OR.  
         For example,
         AGE>10 AND WGT=100 THRU AND SEX='MALE' is not allowed.
      2. Two successive WHENs are not allowed without an intervening END.
      3. The END command terminates the condition established by a WHEN.
      4. The ELSE command reverses the condition established by a WHEN.

WRITE
			WRITE
  Purpose:  Writes data to a file
  Examples:
      WRITE YIELD,BONDS,STOCK ON MYSTOCK
  Hints:
      1.  The output is written as an ASCII file which can be read
          back into STATMATE with the INPUT command.
      2.  By removing the first line of output to the file with an
          editor, the file can be used to input the data into other 
          programs. For example, dBASEIII.

TNPAR
			TNPARAM
  Purpose:  Performs a two-way nonparametric ANOVA
  Examples:
       TNPAR RESPONSE ON GROUP1,GROUP2,TEST=COCHRAN
  Modifiers:
       TEST   : (FRIEDMAN), COCHRAN
  Hints:
      1. In Cochran test, all values must be zero or one.

ONPAR
			ONPARAM
  Purpose:  Performs a one-way nonparametric ANOVA
  Examples:
      ONPARAM XYZ ON LABCLASS
  Modifiers:
      none

KOLMO
			KOLMOGOROV
  Purpose:  Performs a Kolmogorov-Smirnov one- or two- sample test
  Examples:
      KOLMO AFACTOR,DIST=WEIBULL,UPARAM=1.4,SPARAM=2.0
      KOMLO AFACTOR,BFACTOR
  Modifiers:
      DIST    :  (NORMAL), UNIFORM, WEIBULL, CAUCHY, EXPONENTIAL
      UPARAM  :  (0.0)
      SPARAM  :  (1.0)
  Hints:
      1.  normal:      u is mean, s is std. dev.    
      2.  exponential: u = displacement,  s = std. dev.
      3.  Cauchy:      u=median,  u-s=1st quartile, s>0
      4.  uniform:     u=lft end, s=rgt end
      5.  Weibull:     u=shape,   s=scale
      6.  Use DIST, UPARAM, and SPARAM and only one variable for 
	  the one-sample test.
      7.  DIST, UPARAM and SPARAM do not apply to the two-sample test.

PLOT
			PLOT
  Purpose:  Produces scatter diagrams
  Examples:
       PLOT Y1,Y2... ON X,TITLE='DOSAGE VS YEAR'
       PLOT SALES ON YEAR,HRANGE=1900 THRU 1990
       PLOT ?
  Modifiers:
      HRANGE    :  min THRU max
      VRANGE    :  min THRU max
      HPOSITION :  no. of spaces (50)
      VPOSITION :  no. of lines  (40)
      TITLE     :  'title'
      VLABEL    :  'vert-label'
      HLABEL    :  'horiz-label'
  Hints:
      1.  Single quotes (') must appear around labels and titles.
      2.  PLOT ? puts STATMATE into subcommand mode.
      3.  PLOT alone puts STATMATE into subcommand mode.

STEPWISE
			STEPWISE
  Purpose:  Performs a stepwise multiple regression on several variables
  Examples:
      STEPWISE Y ON X1,X2,TABLE=FIT,PAR,ANOVA,FENTER=4.1
      STEP ?
  Modifiers:
      TABLE    :  (PARAM), (FIT), ANOVA, SEP or
                  ALL or NONE
      MAXSTEP  :  (20)
      FORCE    :  (0)
      FENTER   :  (4.0)
      FREMOVE  :  (3.8)
      METHOD   :  (STEPWISE), BACKWARD, FORWARD
  Notes:
	1.  STEP ? puts STATMATE into subcommand mode.
	2.  STEP alone puts STATMATE into subcommand mode.

CHART
			CHART
  Purpose:  Calculates R- and X-control chart statistics
  Examples:
      CHART WIDTH ON MACHINE,TYPE=X,CONTROL=RANGE,TITLE='GAUGE DATA'
  Modifiers:
      KCENTER :  (0.0) known value       KSIGMA  :  (1.0) known value
      BASIS   :  (SIGMA), RANGE, KNOWN   TYPE    :  (XCHART), RCHART 
      DISPLAY :  (TABLE,PLOT), NONE
      HMARK     :  (5)                   HFILLER   :  (2)
      VRANGE    :  (DATA) min THRU max   VPOSITION :  no. of lines  (40)
      TITLE     :  'title'               VLABEL    :  'vert-label'
      HLABEL    :  'horiz-label'
  Hints:
      1.  Use KCENTER and KSIGMA only when you want the
          corresponding chart values to be interpreted from the
	  value specified, i.e., a (K)nown standard.
      2.  Note that the default on control limits is SIGMA.  If
	  you use TYPE=RCHART, then the default of CONTROL=SIGMA is an
	  invalid request.  In this case, you must use CONROL=RANGE
          or CONTROL=KNOWN.
      3.  CHART ? avaialble

CUSUM
  Purpose:  Produces a cumulative sum (cusum) chart
  Examples:
      CUSUM WIDTH ON MACHINE,RESET=YES,HMARK=10,TARGET=0.45
  Modifiers:
      TARGET  :  (0.0)
      DISPLAY :  (TABLE,PLOT)
      RESET   :  (NO) YES
      HMARK     :  (5)
      HFILLER   :  (2)
      VRANGE    :  (DATA) or min THRU max
      VPOSITION :  no. of lines  (40)
      TITLE     :  'title'
      VLABEL    :  'vert-label'
      HLABEL    :  'horiz-label'

BREAKDOWN
			BREAKDOWN
  Purpose:  Produces simple statistics for groups of data
  Examples:
      BREAK HEIGHT ON SEX
      BREAK PRODUCTION ON COMPANY
  Hints:
      1.  Subgroups are defined by the data found in the second, group,
 	  variable.  Statistics are generated for each subgroup.

NONLINEAR
			NONLINEAR
  Purpose:  Performs a nonlinear regression
  Examples:
      NONLINEAR MODEL=GOMPERTZ.FIL,CONV=.004,MAXITER=20,REPORT=5,TYPE=FIT
  Modifiers:
      MODEL     :  file name (MODEL)
      CONVERGE  :  (.001)
      MAXITER   :  (50)
      REPORT    :  (5)
      TYPE      :  (NONE), FIT, FORECAST, RESIDUAL
  Hints:
      1.  MODEL file statements must be in the order: PARAM, INIT, MODEL.
	  For example,
		param  alpha,beta
		initial 22.8, 37.44
		model  urbanpop=alpha+exp(beta*year)
      2.  Limited to at most 5 variables and 5 parameters each.
      3.  Terminate very slow running problems with Control-C key.
      4.  Use REPORT to see intermediate results.
      5.  The last line in the model file must be followed with a
          carriage return.
      6.  When using TYPE, the SET OUT command must be used before
          executing NONLINEAR.

RCORR
			RCORRELATION
  Purpose:  Produces rank correlation coefficients
  Examples:
      RCORR VARA ON VARB,TEST=SPEARMAN,KENDALL
  Modifiers:
      TEST   :   (SPEARMAN)  KENDALL

stop
```
{% endraw %}

{% comment %}samples_end{% endcomment %}

### Directory of PC-SIG Library Disk #0861

     Volume in drive A has no label
     Directory of A:\

    DEMO              5639   7-03-87   9:58a
    FILES861 TXT      2246   2-08-89   2:00p
    GO       BAT        38  11-05-87   3:26p
    GO       TXT       540   2-08-89  12:06p
    HALD     DAT       512   5-03-87   6:18p
    MOTOR    DAT      2560   5-03-87   6:18p
    QAMEAS   DAT       512   5-03-87   6:19p
    README            7475   1-28-89   2:01p
    SAMPLE   DAT       640   5-03-87   6:19p
    SMASKC   OVR     12288   9-15-87   9:17p
    SMATE    EXE     57344   9-15-87   9:33p
    SMBRKD   OVR      8192   9-15-87   9:23p
    SMHELP   TXT     16512   6-02-87   8:32p
    SMINLX   OVR      3072   9-15-87   9:18p
    SMINPT   OVR      9216   9-15-87   9:19p
    SMINSTLL EXE     37376   2-27-80  11:37p
    SMKOLM   OVR     12800   9-15-87   9:28p
    SMONET   OVR     14336   9-15-87   9:26p
    SMONEW   OVR      6656   9-15-87   9:26p
    SMONPR   OVR     12288   9-15-87   9:28p
    SMQDATA  COM     19292   5-14-88   9:10p
    SMRCOR   OVR     15872   9-15-87   9:27p
    SMSA$             3456   9-15-87   9:09p
    SMSETI   OVR      5120   9-15-87   9:17p
    SMSHOW   OVR      5120   9-15-87   9:19p
    SMSTAT   OVR      9216   9-15-87   9:20p
    SMSYAN   OVR     13312   9-15-87   9:18p
    SMTNPR   OVR     11264   9-15-87   9:28p
    SMTTES   OVR      5120   9-15-87   9:21p
    SMTWOT   OVR     11776   9-15-87   9:27p
    SMTWOW   OVR     12800   9-15-87   9:27p
    USPOP    DAT       640   5-03-87   6:19p
    USPOPDEM DAT       512   5-03-87   6:19p
           33 file(s)     323742 bytes
                           27648 bytes free
