---
layout: page
title: "PC-SIG Diskette Library (Disk #2304)"
permalink: /software/pcx86/sw/misc/pcsig/2000-2999/DISK2304/
machines:
  - id: ibm5170
    type: pcx86
    config: /machines/pcx86/ibm/5170/cga/1024kb/rev3/machine.xml
    diskettes: /machines/pcx86/diskettes.json,/disks/pcsigdisks/pcx86/diskettes.json
    autoGen: true
    autoMount:
      B: "PC-SIG Library Disk #2304"
    autoType: $date\r$time\rB:\rDIR\r
---

{% include machine.html id="ibm5170" %}

{% comment %}info_begin{% endcomment %}

## Information about "FRACTINT"

    FRACTINT plots and manipulates images of "objects" -- actually sets of
    mathematical points -- that have fractal dimension.  Using integer math,
    these sets of points are generated by relatively simple calculations
    repeated over and over, feeding the results of each step back into the
    next, something computers can do very rapidly.  FRACTINT lets you zoom
    into a small area created by the calculations to reveal intricate
    detail, from which you can assign colors to selected points and
    "animate" the images by quickly shifting those color assignments.
    
    An advantage of FRACTINT over other fractal graphics programs is that,
    as formerly mentioned, it uses integer math, rather than the
    floating-point calculations. That means that you don't need a math
    coprocessor chip (aka floating-point unit or FPU), though it will
    recognize and automatically use an 80x87 chip if it's present.
    
    FRACTINT works with many adapter and graphics modes from CGA to the
    1024x768, 256-color 8514/A mode.  Even "larger" images, up to
    2048x2048x256, can be plotted to RAM, EMS, or disk: this bypasses the
    screen and allows you to create images with higher resolution than your
    current display can handle, and to run in "background" under
    multi-tasking control programs such as DESQview.
    
    The program was born fast through an experiment in collaboration by Bert
    Tyler and many volunteers.  The authors of this public domain program
    encourage further contribution of ideas to make FRACTINT even better
    than it already is:  "speedy, versatile, and all-around wonderful."
{% comment %}info_end{% endcomment %}


### Directory of PC-SIG Library Disk #2304

     Volume in drive A has no label
     Directory of A:\

    FRAINT   EXE    236585   5-28-90   2:37p
    FILE2304 TXT      3109   8-29-90  12:45p
    GO       BAT        40   1-01-80   6:00a
    GO       TXT      1112   1-01-80   4:44a
            4 file(s)     240846 bytes
                           77824 bytes free
